# FINAL PROJECT PLAN

# #Overview:
	The core objective of our project is to provide thorough analysis on the Health and Demographics Dataset with the World Bank Dataset. Our first step will be to properly clean and process the data in order to make it well-structured and easier to work with. The raw datasets will need data cleaning to make it usable, fill or remove missing values, correcting the discrepancies, and transforming the datasets into a form that can be easily queried and analyzed.After the datasets are ready, we will look to see how factors such as economic conditions and health research funding may impacts life expectancy. Specifically, our plan is to study the link between life expectancy and factors such as the socio-economic environment a population finds itself in as well as how much funding is directed to health outcomes related research. Through examining these aspects further, we wish to quantify whether the rises in economic investment or health research funding are linked to an increase in life expectancy or alternatively if an amount less causes declines in public health. Given the current political climate, this piece is particularly relevant since the United States government continues to impose sweeping cuts to funding in areas like healthcare research and education. Already the administration has taken steps to cut investment in the essential healthcare programs that could affect long-term health outcomes of the population. Furthermore, the withdrawal of the Department of Education invites even more alarm about equitable access to education and the potential ramifications on public health and the quality of life. In this project, we would like to grasp the implications of these funding cuts on a larger scale. We will delve into how financial support in fields including healthcare, education, and research could potentially be fundamental in determining population health and longevity. In looking at how these various facets of healthcare are intertwined, we will hopefully highlight how under-investing in these aspects could have detrimental consequences for the health outcomes of the general population going forward. Our ultimate aim is to unearth factual based information on the effects of cutting funding to the public services we consider vital to us all and how these disputes could potentially impact the lives and life expectancy of people.


## Research Questions: 

What is the effect of education spending on life expectancy in low-income vs. high-income countries?
How is access to healthcare related to life expectancy in countries of different economic status?
Is life expectancy correlated with economic indicators like GDP per capita and unemployment rates across countries?
All three research questions we’re proposing look at life expectancy. But we're not solely interested in life expectancy, but we want to look at all the other variables that correlate with it. In order to perform a more thorough analysis, we will be a multitude of confounding factors using country analysis, like genetic predispositions to particular diseases, diets varying with ethnicity and lifestyle differences within countries, which may determine life expectancy globally. Vertical Focus on Countries Instead of States Offers a Wider Annotated Horizon Around Influences. For instance, while life expectancy is quite different in US states, the variation is much lower than the ones that can be observed between countries. There are wide ranges of life expectancies across the world, which makes one wonder what the factors underneath these differences may be. For example, simply looking across countries at the variation in life expectancy provides insight into what specific factors such as access to healthcare, levels of education, economic conditions or public health policies, may contribute to higher or lower life expectancy. In that data, by exploring life expectancy at a global level we can see trends and correlations that at first glance, do not show up in smaller, localized data sets. This wider angle allows us to identify significant signals and insights that could inform or clarify policy direction and understanding of the determinants of population health at a broad level.


## Team: 
This final project will be completed by Alejandra Cornejo and Karolina Mikulec. Since this is a team effort, we will make sure to divy the work equally. The main tasks of this project are gathering the data, doing some coding, noting any important information revealed throughout the process, and analyzing in order to find any correlations or relationships. Furthermore, we will split up the tasks so one person, Alejandra Cornejo, will be working with the data and the coding, while Karolina Mikulec will be working on documenting everything and performing further analysis on the code. Alejandra will work by preparing the raw data through cleaning, integrating, profiling, and acquiring. She will be working with tools like Visual Studio Code, Github, and Snakemake. On the other hand, Karolina will be in charge of citations, visualizations, and further exploring the data. Karolina will do most of the written portion of the project and make sure everything follows the guidelines and is formatted correctly. Both of us will hold each other accountable and work together in order to progress through the project.


## Datasets: 
When looking at the datasets individually, the World Bank dataset was originally an excel file that is now a json file for purposes of our analysis that includes statistics involving the financials and populations of 264 different countries and regions. The dataset includes variables like country name, country code, region code, GDP/PPP which is normalized to test the economic status of each country, population, population CGR to show development patterns, internet users, population in largest city, 2014 life expectancy, and literacy rate for adults. This dataset allows us to get a deeper look and build questions regarding the relationships between societal aspects like population, technology, and financials. 
On the other hand, the Health and Demographics dataset is a csv file that includes 133 countries with data ranging from 2000 to 2015. Including 22 columns, this dataset includes variables of the country’s development status, the life expectancy, the adult mortality, infant deaths, alcohol consumption, health expenditures (percentage expenditure), immunization rates for Diphtheria, Polio, and Hepatitis B, the prevalence of Measles and HIV/AIDS, GDP, BMI, average years of schooling, populations, and income composition of resources. The main purpose of this dataset is to analyze the impact that key factors from each country’s population has on life expectancy. Similar to the first dataset, this data allows us to mostly look at the public health of each country. 
As explained in the overview, the variety in a country’s status and policies can lead to certain health trends which we are interested in diving deeper into. After preparing the data, we can perform comparative analysis in order to see how health, societal, and financial aspects all impact life expectancy. With the first dataset providing more financial information and with the second dataset being more health related, we are able to truly analyze any relationships since health is such an important topic especially in today’s society. 

## Timeline: 
Making a timeline is necessary in order to complete the project in a timely manner and within our best capabilities. Furthermore, keeping in mind our responsibilities, we have formatted a timeline for ourselves.  The first week was March 9th - March 15th, and the task for the week was to pick a partner and to create a Github repository including the two of us. The second week is March 30th - April 5th where the task was to create and submit an initial project plan that consists of the subject and datasets we chose. For the first two weeks, Karolina and Alejandra worked together. The third week is April 6th - April 12th where the task is to prepare the data, profile, assess, integrate, and clean it in preparation for analysis which will be completed by Alejandra. The fourth week is April 13th - April 19th where Karolina will submit a status (interim) report for the beginning stages of the project and where visualizations and deep analysis will be taking place. The fifth week is April 20th - April 26th where Alejandra will work on the automated workflows and where Karolina will document them. The sixth week is April 27th to May 3rd where Karolina will finish all the documentations, post to Box, make sure license and citations are accurate, create a metadata, and archive the project. During this time, Karolina and Alejandra will submit the final project and make sure all requirements are met. 

